Thanks for letting me know about your difficulties with the word problems.

The problems aren't intended to torture you.  Although your perseverance is
admirable, I wouldn't recommend spending four hours on a single problem.  If you
haven't figured a problem out in about 15 minutes you can either:
    - find a TA or fellow student and ask for assistance
    - give it a break and try again the next day
    - skip that one and wait for the answer key

The word problems also aren't intended to be especially tricky.  There
is always some straightforward way to translate the text into an
equation.  Some of the extra credit problems are more tricky and
require you to notice some subtle feature of the problem.  But that's
why I make these problems extra credit, so you know that it is fine to
skip them if you want.

You suggested modifying the problem so that the fractions come out
simpler.  If you take a look at the answer key, you'll see that all of
the ages actually are integers.  I do always try to minimize the
computations required, since the course is about algebra, not
long-division.  If you find yourself doing complicated computations,
it is often a sign that your equation is not quite correct.  This
problem is also actually a true story.  Diophantes is a real guy and
it is true that these are the only facts that people know about his
life.

There are several reasons why I think word problems are useful.

When you have to do math in your life, you aren't likely to be given
an equation that you have to solve.  Instead, you will have some
situation which has a bunch of numbers and facts, and you will have to
use the facts to figure out the other facts in which you are
interested.  This might come up if you are running a business, buying
a house, writing a computer program, solving an engineering problem,
etc.  Doing word problems helps you get better at translating
real-world situations into equations.

I know that you aren't likely to need to figure out Diophantes age outside of a 
math class.  But the practice turning English into equations will help you turn 
other English into equations.

The more immediate practical application of word problems is the final for this
course.  I don't make up the final, but it is likely to contain some word
problems.  So you need to practice them so you will be prepared. 

I don't exclusively use the word problems from the text for a few reasons.

The text word problems are generally very short, so translating from English to
an equation is often fairly trivial.  The text word problems are often things
like: 

"If Joe traveled for 2 hours on his bicycle and went 30 miles, what was his
average speed?"

This sort of problem just requires plugging numbers into the right places in 
d = rt.  So I try to think of some more challenging problems which are still
doable but require a bit more thought.

I probably don't always succeed, but I also try to think of problems which are
interesting or entertaining in some way, so you can see how algebra might be
useful in your life.  You may not care about Joe and his bicycle speed.  But you
might be more interested in knowing how much more a football coach makes than a
math teacher.  Or you might be interested in knowing about the judges in PA
(also a true story) and their bribery scheme.

I'm also trying to get everyone ready for the final.  I think the problems on
the homework are likely to be slightly harder than the ones that will show up on
the final.  So if you get good at doing the homework, the final will seem
straightforward.  It's sort of like the way a baseball player will warm up with
weights on his bat so that when he takes them off, swinging the weight-free bat
seems easier. 

Anyway, keep trying to do the word problems, but don't try so hard.  If you
don't get the answer, skip it and move on and try the next one or find someone
to help you figure it out.  If you keep trying them they'll get easier 
eventually.

--Ed
